Bring compiler docs up to speed with Python 3.10 (#706)
python/devguide: compiler.rst

the arena about it by calling ``PyArena_AddPyObject()``.

> Tokens to AST

Reviewer: Using tokens here is a bit confusing because the source of all the "public" APIs used by interpreter takes the source code as a string buffer, and in the process of parsing, it transforms it to tokens. I suggest to change these occurrences to "source code to AST".

Author: Thank you. I was initially confused too but I was hesitant to change it -- lots of the online diagrams I read didn't seem to actually reflect what the source code was doing. Eventually I just gave up and stepped through the source code to write these docs :P.

-------------

The AST is generated from tokens using the function
``_PyPegen_run_parser()`` (:file:`Parser/pegen.c`), which is a thin wrapper over

> the function ``_PyPegen_parse()`` (:file:`Parser/parser.c`).

Reviewer: `_PyPegen_run_parser` and `_PyPegen_parse` are technically implementation details. I prefer to reference the actual APis used by the interepter: `_PyParser_ASTFromFile` and `_PyParser_ASTFromString` (and other variants).

Where *xx* is the grammar rule that the function handles (these names are
derived from :file:`Grammar/python.gram`).

Each rule function in turn creates an AST node as it goes along.  It does this
by allocating all the new nodes it needs, calling the proper AST node creation
functions for any required supporting functions and connecting them as needed.
This continues until all nonterminal symbols are replaced with terminals.  If an
error occurs, the rule functions backtrack and try another rule function.  If
there are no more rules, an error is set and the parsing ends.

The AST node creation functions have the name :samp:`_PyAST_{xx}` where *xx* is
the AST node that the function creates. These are defined by the ASDL grammar
and contained in :file:`Python/Python-ast.c` (which is generated by
:file:`Parser/asdl_c.py` from :file:`Parser/Python.asdl`).  This all leads to a
sequence of AST nodes stored in ``asdl_seq`` structs.

To avoid bad performance during backtracking, rules (other than the top level
ones) are memoized.  Each rule checks if a memoized version exists and returns
that if so, else it continues in the manner stated in the previous paragraph.

> Macros for using ``asdl_seq *`` types as found

Reviewer: I would prefer to mention *first* the typed macros and then mention that for generic functions, there are untyped counterparts that should be used as a last resort when some function that acts on generic sequences is required.

in :file:`Python/asdl.c` and :file:`Include/Internal/pycore_asdl.h` are as
follows:

``asdl_seq_GET_UNTYPED(asdl_seq *, int)``
        Get item held at a specific position in an ``asdl_seq``
``asdl_seq_SET_UNTYPED(asdl_seq *, int, stmt_ty)``
        Set a specific index in an ``asdl_seq`` to the specified value
``asdl_seq_LEN(asdl_seq *)``
        Return the length of an ``asdl_seq``

> There are also typed counterparts for some of the macros above.  These

Reviewer: Let's mention that these sequence functions and another part of the API is automatically generated by the AST generation code, while the generic headers live in https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/Include/internal/pycore_asdl.h

tokens and matching these tokens recursively to their corresponding rule.  The
rule's corresponding rule function is called on every match.  These rule
functions follow the format :samp:`xx_rule`.  Where *xx* is the grammar rule
that the function handles and is automatically derived from
:file:`Grammar/python.gram` by :file:`Tools/peg_generator/pegen/c_generator.py`.

Each rule function in turn creates an AST node as it goes along.  It does this
by allocating all the new nodes it needs, calling the proper AST node creation
functions for any required supporting functions and connecting them as needed.
This continues until all nonterminal symbols are replaced with terminals.  If an
error occurs, the rule functions backtrack and try another rule function.  If
there are no more rules, an error is set and the parsing ends.

The AST node creation functions have the name :samp:`_PyAST_{xx}` where *xx* is
the AST node that the function creates. These are defined by the ASDL grammar
and contained in :file:`Python/Python-ast.c` (which is generated by
:file:`Parser/asdl_c.py` from :file:`Parser/Python.asdl`).  This all leads to a
sequence of AST nodes stored in ``asdl_seq`` structs.

> To avoid bad performance during backtracking, rules (other than the top level
> ones) are memoized.  Each rule function checks if a memoized version exists and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid bad performance during backtracking, some rules, chosen by applying a
flag in the grammar file, are memoized.  Each rule function checks if a memoized
version exists and
```

Author: Wow thanks! I didn't know that a flag existed. Cool, I just noticed the ``(memo)`` flag in the grammar file.

    asdl_c.py
        "Generate C code from an ASDL description."  Generates
        :file:`Python/Python-ast.c` and :file:`Include/Internal/pycore_ast.h`.

    parser.c
        The parser generated by :file:`Tools/peg_generator/pegen/c_generator.py`
        from the grammar :file:`Grammar/python.gram`.  Creates the AST from
        source code.  Rule functions for their corresponding production rules
        are found here.

    peg_api.c

>         Contains high-level functions to create an AST from source code which
>         are used by the interpreter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Contains high-level functions, that are part of the C API, to create an AST from source code which
        are used by the interpreter.
```

Author: Hmm I think they were removed from the C API https://github.com/python/cpython/commit/57364ce34e0492fbc8b0a6b8c882f384bb489457.

Reviewer 2: Oh, you're right!

    pegen.c

>         The new PEG parser introduced in 3.9.  Contains helper functions which

Reviewer 2: Let's move the first sentence, `The new PEG parser introduced in 3.9.` to `parser.c`. `pegen.c` only contains helper functions.

    asdl_c.py
        "Generate C code from an ASDL description."  Generates

>         :file:`Python/Python-ast.c` and :file:`Include/Internal/pycore_ast.h`.

Reviewer: I like these descriptions but the header files get refactored quite a lot (specially the ast ones) so I am a bit scared that this gets out of date, but is still an improvement so I say: let's merge it.
